= GC3Libs =


== Introduction ==

The gc3utils is a suite of Python classes to aid in submitting batch
jobs to various cluster & grid resources seamlessly.

Most of the time a user has lots of different accounts on lots of
different resources.  The idea is that a user can their jobs from one
place with a few simple commands.


== Design points ==
  * The user should be able to run everything out of their own home directory.  No admin interference needed.
  * A "Resources" is a cluster, grid, or other entity that provides compute cycles.  These are defined in a config file.
  * The user provides credentials and login information for each Resource.


== Structure ==

Outline of the current (as of 2010-07) code repository layout.

_*Note:*_ This section is badly out-of-date... better delete it?

=== Mark's Tools _(depends on gorg.model, ase)_ === 
  * Mark's Tools
  * IO
  * calculator
   * gamessparser.py
   * gamess.py
   * apbs.py ?
   * Turbochem.py ?
  * usertasks
   * ghessian.py
   * grestart.py
   * gsingle.py
  * lib
   * utils.py
    * CreateLogger(logging_level)
  * examples
  * doc
  * tools
 
=== gorg _(depends on gc3utils.lib)_ === 
  * Model
  * lib
   * utils.py
    * CreateLogger(logging_level)
   * dummytasks.py 
    * dummyclass (blah)
  {{{
  IF TASK SUPPLIED:
  look for class with that name...
  ELSE:
  submit: (submit whatever input supplied)
  get: (get whatever)
  kill: (kill whatever)
  status: (stat whatever)
  tasklist: (list whatever)
  }}}
  * examples
  * tools
   * submittask → dummytasks.dummyclass
   * gettask
   * killtask
   * taskstatus
   * tasklist
  * doc
 
=== gorg_site _(depends on gorg.model)_ === 
  * Control
  * lib
   * utils.py
    * CreateLogger(logging_level)
 
=== gc3utils _(depends on nothing)_ === 
  * lib
  * utils.py
   * LRMS
   * ArcLRMS
   * SshLRMS
   * etc
  * tools?? (del?)
  * doc
  * examples



== Index of relevant pages ==

 * [Gc3utils/Authentication] : interface and intended usage of the authentication-related classes in the `gc3utils` module.
