#summary How to install GC3Pie
#labels Featured

= Installation of GC3Pie =

== Installation ==

These instructions show how to install GC3Pie from the GC3 source
repository into a separate python environment (called "virtualenv").
Installation into a virtualenv has two distinct advantages:
  * All code is confined in a single directory, and can thus be easily replaced/removed.
  * Better dependency handling: additional Python packages that GC3Pie depends upon can be installed even if they conflict with system-level packages.


0. Install software prerequisites: 
   
  * On Debian/Ubuntu, install packages: `subversion`, `python-dev`, `python-profiler` and the C/C++ compiler:
{{{
   apt-get install subversion python-dev python-profiler gcc g++
}}}
  * On CentOS5, install packages `subversion` and `python-devel` and the C/C++ compiler:
{{{
      yum install subversion python-devel gcc gcc-c++
}}}
  * On other Linux distributions, you will need to install:
    * the `svn` command (from the [http://subversion.tigris.org SubVersion] VCS)
    * [http://www.python.org Python] development headers and libraries (for installing 
      extension libraries written in C/C++)
    * the Python package `pstats` (it's part of the Python
      standard library, but it sometimes needs separate installation)
    * a C/C++ compiler (this is usually installed by default).

In order to use the ARC backend (required for [http://www.smscg.ch SMSCG]), you need the
[http://www.nordugrid.org NorduGrid/ARC] binaries and a working `slcs-init` command
installed on the same machine where GC3Pie are.  You can find
instructions for installing it at:

    http://www.smscg.ch/WP/middleware/release_2_0/smscg_ui_Binary_Installation.html

Additional OS-specific installation details can be found on page
[OSSpecificInstallDetails OS-Specific Install Details]

1. Choose a directory where the GC3Pie software will be installed;
any directory that's writable by your Linux account will be ok.

If you are installing system-wide as `root`, we suggest you
install GC3Pie into `/opt/gc3pie`.

If you are installing as a normal user, we suggest you install
GC3Pie into `$HOME/gc3pie`.


2. If it's not already installed, get the `virtualenv` Python package
and install it (more info at http://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenv):
{{{
   wget http://pypi.python.org/packages/source/v/virtualenv/virtualenv-1.5.1.tar.gz
   tar -xzf virtualenv-1.5.1.tar.gz && rm virtualenv-1.5.1.tar.gz
   cd virtualenv-1.5.1/
}}}
If you are installing as `root`, the following command is all you
need:
{{{
   python setup.py install
}}}
If instead you are installing as a normal, unprivileged user,
things get more complicated:
{{{
   export PYTHONPATH=$HOME/lib64/python:$HOME/lib/python:$PYTHONPATH
   export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/bin
   mkdir -p $HOME/lib/python
   python setup.py install --home $HOME
}}}
(You will also need to add the two `export` lines above to the
`$HOME/.bashrc` file -if using the `bash` shell- or to the
`$HOME/.cshrc` file -if using the `tcsh` shell.)

In any case, once `virtualenv` has been installed, you can exit
its directory and remove it:
{{{   
  cd ..
  rm -rf virtualenv-1.5.1
}}}


3. Create a virtualenv to host the `gc3pie` installation at the
directory you chose in Step 1.:
{{{
   virtualenv $HOME/gc3pie # use '/opt/gc3pie' if installing as root
   cd $HOME/gc3pie/
   source bin/activate
}}}


4. Check-out the `gc3pie` files in a `src/` directory::
{{{     
   svn co http://gc3pie.googlecode.com/svn/branches/1.0/gc3pie src
}}}
  

5. Install the `gc3pie` in "develop" mode, so any modification
pulled from subversion is immediately reflected in the running
environment:
{{{
   cd src/
   env CC=gcc ./setup.py develop 
   cd .. # back into the `gc3pie` directory
}}}
This will place all the GC3Pie command into the `gc3pie/bin/`
directory.


6. GC3Pie comes with driver scripts to run and manage large families
of jobs from a few selected applications.  These scripts are not
installed by default because not everyone needs them.

Run the following commands to install the driver scripts for the
applications you need::
{{{
   # if you are insterested in GAMESS, do the following
   ln -s '../src/gc3apps/gamess/ggamess.py' bin/ggamess
   
   # if you are insterested in Rosetta, do the following
   ln -s '../src/gc3apps/rosetta/gdocking.py' bin/gdocking
   ln -s '../src/gc3apps/rosetta/grosetta.py' bin/grosetta

   # if you are insterested in Codeml, do the following
   ln -s '../src/gc3apps/codeml/gcodeml.py' bin/gcodeml
}}}


7. Before you can actually run the GC3Pie, you need to have a working
configuration file; the ConfigurationFile Wiki page provides an
explanation of the syntax to use in configuration files.

An example configuration file, enabling access to the [http://www.smscg.ch SMSCG]
infrastructure can be found at:

     http://gc3pie.googlecode.com/svn/branches/1.0/gc3pie/gc3libs/etc/gc3pie.conf.smscg

Before you can actually use this file, you will need to insert into it
three values, for which we can provide no default: `aai_username`,
`idp`, and `vo`.

  * aai_username: 
     This is the "username" you are asked for when
     accessing any [http://www.switch.ch/aai SWITCHaai] / Shibboleth
     web page, e.g., https://gc3-aai01.uzh.ch/secure/

  * idp: 
     Find this out with the command `slcs-info`: it prints a list of
     IdP (Identity Provider IDs) followed by the human-readable name
     of the associated institution. Pick the one that corresponds to
     you University.  It is always the last two components of the
     University's Internet domain name (e.g., `uzh.ch` or `ethz.ch`).

  * vo: 
     In order to use SMSCG, you must sign up to a VO (Virtual
     Organisation).  One the words `life`, `earth`, `atlas` or
     `crypto` should be here.  Find out more at:
     http://www.smscg.ch/www/user/


   
== Upgrade ==

These instructions show how to upgrade the GC3Pie scripts to the
latest version found in the GC3 svn repository.

1. `cd` to the directory containing the GC3Pie virtualenv; assuming
it's named `gc3pie` as in the above installation instructions, you
can issue the commands:
{{{
     cd $HOME/gc3pie # use '/opt/gc3pie' if root
}}}

2. Activate the Python virtualenv:
{{{
     source bin/activate
}}}

3. Upgrade the `gc3pie` source and run the `setup.py` script again:
{{{
   cd src
   svn up
   env CC=gcc ./setup.py develop
}}}

*Note:* A major restructuring of the SVN repository took place in
r1124 to r1126 (Feb. 15, 2011); if your sources are older than SVN
r1124, these upgrade instructions will _not_ work, and you must
[#Installation reinstall completely].  You can check what version the SVN
sources are, by running the `svn info` command in the `src` directory:
watch out for the `Revision:` line.


=== HTML Documentation ===

HTML documentation for the GC3Libs programming interface can be
read online at:
     
  http://gc3pie.googlecode.com/svn/branches/1.0/docs/html/index.html

Or you can generate a local copy from the sources:
{{{
  cd $HOME/gc3pie # use '/opt/gc3pie' if root
  cd src/docs
  make html
}}}