#summary How to install the GC3Utils.

= Installation of GC3Utils =

== Installation ==

It is recommended that you develop and run under a [http://pypi.python.org/pypi/virtualenv Python Virtualenv] environment.

These instructions show how to install the GC3Utils from the GC3 svn
repository into their own python environment.

0. Prerequisites are: `svn` (package `subversion` in CentOS5 and
Debian/Ubuntu), the Python development headers and libraries (package
`python-devel` in CentOS5, `python-dev` in Debian/Ubuntu).
These should be available in any decent Linux distribution.


1. If it's not already installed, get the `virtualenv` Python package
and install it:
{{{
   wget http://bitbucket.org/ianb/virtualenv/get/tip.gz#egg=virtualenv-tip
   tar -xzf tip.gz && rm tip.gz 
   cd virtualenv/
}}}
If you are installing as `root`, the following command is all you
need:
{{{
   python setup.py install
}}}
If instead you are installing as a normal, unprivileged user,
things get more complicated:
{{{
   export PYTHONPATH=$HOME/lib/python:$PYTHONPATH
   export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/bin
   mkdir -p $HOME/lib/python
   python setup.py install --home $HOME
}}}
(You will also need to add the two `export` lines above to the
`$HOME/.bashrc` file -if using the `bash` shell- or to the
`$HOME/.cshrc` file -if using the `tcsh` shell.)

In any case, once `virtualenv` has been installed, you can exit
its directory and remove it:
{{{   
  cd ..
  rm -rf virtualenv
}}}


2. Create a virtuelnv to host the `gc3utils` installation:
{{{
    virtualenv gc3utils
    cd gc3utils/
    source bin/activate
}}}


3. Create a `src/` directory to host the Python sources and
check-out the `gc3utils` files there:
{{{     
    mkdir src
    cd src/
    svn co http://gc3pie.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/gc3utils
}}}   

  
4. Install the `gc3utils` in "develop" mode, so any modification
pulled from subversion is immediately reflected in the running environment:
{{{
    cd gc3utils/
    env CC=gcc ./setup.py develop 
    cd .. # back into the `src` directory
}}}
This will place all the GC3Utils command into the `gc3utils/bin/`
directory.


5. Before you can actually run the GC3Utils, you need to have a
working configuration file;
[http://code.google.com/p/gc3pie/wiki/ConfigurationFile the ConfigurationFile Wiki page]
provides an explanation of the syntax to use in configuration files.

In order to use the ARC backend, you need the NorduGrid/ARC
binaries installed on the same machine where GC3Utils are.
You can find instructions for installing ARC at:
http://www.nordugrid.org/documents/ng-client-install.html


   
== Upgrade ==

These instructions show how to upgrade the GC3Utils scripts to the
latest version found in the GC3 svn repository.

1. `cd` to the directory containing the GC3Utils virtualenv;
assuming it's named `gc3utils` as in the above installation
instructions, you can issue the commands:
{{{
  cd gc3utils/src
}}}


2. Upgrade the `gc3utils` source and run the `setup.py` script again:
{{{
  cd gc3utils
  svn up
  env CC=gcc ./setup.py develop
  cd ..
}}}